docs/documentation.rst, before:

Documentation
=============

Below is documentation for the various features in this module!

.. _Supported Conversions:

Supported Conversions
---------------------

Metric Conversions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below are the supported metric prefixes handled in this package:

.. code:: python

    'y': 1e-24
    'z': 1e-21
    'a': 1e-18
    'f': 1e-15
    'p': 1e-12
    'n': 1e-9
    'µ': 1e-6
    'mc': 1e-6      # for those who cannot use the µ symbol
    'm': 1e-3
    'c': 1e-2
    'd': 1e-1
    'da': 1e1
    'h': 1e2
    'k': 1e3
    'M': 1e6
    'G': 1e9
    'T': 1e12
    'P': 1e15
    'E': 1e18
    'Z': 1e21
    'Y': 1e24

And here are the supported units for converting metric:

.. code:: python

    's', 'm', 'g', 'K', 'mol', 'J', 'W', 'N', 'Pa', 'L'

Conversion Factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below is a list of supported units for conversions for each conversion type. It contains the unit, followed by its conversion factor to the chosen reference unit for the conversion group (conversion factor is simply what you multiply a measurement in that unit by to get the number of reference units).

Length Conversions
++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is meters.

.. code:: python

    'ft': 0.3048    # feet
    'yd': 0.9144    # yards
    'in': 0.0254    # inches
    'mi': 1609      # miles
    'ly': 946e13    # light years
    'au': 1496e8    # astronomical units
    'pc': 31e15     # parsecs
    'm': 1          # meters

Weight / Mass Conversions
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is grams.

.. code:: python

    'g': 1              # grams
    'lb': 454           # pounds
    'oz': 454 / 16      # ounces
    'st': 6356          # stones
    'amu': 1.661e-24    # atomic mass units

Time Conversions
++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is seconds.

.. code:: python

    's': 1                          # seconds
    'min': 60                       # minutes
    'hr': 3600                      # hours
    'dy': 3600 * 24                 # days
    'wk': 3600 * 24 * 7             # weeks
    'yr': 3600 * 24 * 365.25        # year

Volume Conversions
++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is liters.

.. code:: python

    'L': 1                  # liters
    'c.': 0.2366,           # cups
    'pt.': 0.2366 * 2       # pints
    'qt.': 0.2366 * 4       # quarts
    'gal.': 0.2366 * 16     # gallons
    'fl. oz': 0.2366 / 8    # fluid ounces
    'tbsp': 0.2366 / 16     # tablespoons
    'tsp': 0.2366 / 48      # teaspoons

Temperature Conversions
+++++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is Kelvin. Note: these are absolute temperature conversions (not in reference to the boiling point of water like traditional Celsius and Fahrenheit)

.. code:: python

    'deg. C': 1             # degrees Celsius
    'deg. F': 5 / 9         # degrees Fahrenheit
    'K': 1                  # Kelvin

Pressure Conversions
++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is the atm.

.. code:: python

    'atm': 1                # atmospheres
    'torr': 0.0013157       # torr
    'mm Hg': 0.0013157      # millimeters mercury
    'bar': 0.986923         # bars
    'Pa': 0.0000098         # pascals
    'psi': 0.068046         # pounds per cubed inch

Quantity
--------

This is the class that will manage most of your conversions. To import this, you can run either of the following:

.. code:: python

    from unisci import Quantity
    from unisci.types import Quantity

You can create a Quantity using a constructor in the following format: 

.. code:: 

    Quantity(<value>, <dict>)

Where <value> is the numerical value of the Quantity and <dict> is a dictionary of units and their powers. For example, here is the initialization of a Quantity holding the value :code:`1.0 m/s²`.

.. code:: python

    >>> length = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(length)
    1.000*10⁰ m/s²

Below are methods associated with this class. :code:`quan` represents an arbitrary Quantity object.

:code:`Quantity.set_precision()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_precision(number: int) -> None

Sets the precision (number of decimal places) of printing output. The default value is 3, which is why the above example prints :code:`1.000` rather than :code:`1.0`. The below example sets the precision to 2 decimal places.

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_precision(number=2)

:code:`Quantity.set_auto_format()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_auto_format(do: bool) -> None

Determines if the auto-conversions should be done. For example, when multiplying Quantity's with units :code:`m` and :code:`in`, if :code:`auto_format` is enabled, the product will be in the units of the first number. It also enables auto-condensation of complicated units, which will be elaborated upon further regarding the :code:`x.simplified()` method.

.. code:: python

    >>> length_m = Quantity(1, {'m': 1})
    >>> length_in = Quantity(40, {'in': 1})
    >>> print(length_m * length_in)
    1.016*10⁰ m²
    >>> Quantity.set_auto_format(False)
    >>> print(length_m * length_in)
    4.000*10¹ m-in

:code:`quan.value`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python
    
    quan.value -> float

Returns the numerical value of the Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> x = Quantity(12, {'m': 1})
    >>> print(x.value)
    12.0

:code:`quan.units`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.units -> dict[str, int]

Returns a dictionary of units and powers of the Quantity's overall composition. Internally, the dictionary is stored as :code:`quan.unit_type`, but calling :code:`quan.units` is better because it returns a copy of the dictionary.

.. code:: python

    >>> x = Quantity(12, {'m': 1})
    >>> print(x.units)
    {'m': 1}

:code:`quan.converted()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.converted(target_units: list[str]) -> Quantity

Returns a Quantity converted to all the units it can in the provided list of target units. 

.. code:: python

    >>> velocity = Quantity(1, {'in': 1, 'min': -1})
    >>> print(velocity)
    1.000*10⁰ in/min
    >>> velocity = velocity.converted(['cm', 's'])
    >>> print(velocity)
    4.233*10⁻² cm/s

Supported units for conversion can be found in the :ref:`Supported Conversions` section.

:code:`quan.converted_metric()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.converted_metric(target: str, original: str) -> Quantity

Returns a new Quantity with metric conversions being done. This is useful for complex units that aren't supported in normal conversions, such as Newtons or Joules.

.. code:: python

    >>> energy = Quantity(1000, {'J': 1})
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10³ J
    >>> energy = energy.converted_metric(original='J', target='kJ')
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10⁰ kJ

Specific Conversions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods are available for specific conversions, although generally using :code:`quan.converted()` is better:

    * :code:`quan.converted_length()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_mass()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_time()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_volume()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_temperature()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_pressure()`

All of the following follow the same format:

.. code:: python

    quan.converted_function(target: str, original: str) -> Quantity

They take in a target unit and an optional original unit. If no original unit is entered, all compatible conversions will be done to the target unit. These are useful for when you want to convert only one kind of unit to the other, as shown here:

.. code:: python

    >>> weird_unit = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 'ft': -1})
    >>> print(weird_unit)
    1.000*10⁰ m/ft
    >>> weird_unit = weird_unit.converted_length(original='ft', target='in')
    >>> print(weird_unit)
    8.333*10⁻² m/in

:code:`quan.simplified()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.simplified() -> Quantity

Returns a Quantity with units automatically condensed into complex units. If `Quantity.auto_format` is set to True, this will happen automatically upon conversions or multiplications with other units.

.. code:: python

    >>> Quantity.set_auto_format(False)
    >>> force = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 'kg': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(force)
    1.000*10⁰ m-kg/s²
    >>> print(force.simplified())
    1.000*10⁰ N

:code:`quan.force_simplified()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.force_simplified(target: str, exp: int = 1) -> Quantity

Forcibly converts a unit to the given target. Does this by multiplying by the inverse of the 'base units'.

.. code:: python

    >>> acceleration = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(acceleration)
    1.000*10⁰ m/s²
    >>> print(acceleration.force_simplified(target='N', exp=1))
    1.000*10⁰ N/kg

:code:`quan.to_base_units()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.to_base_units() -> Quantity

Simplifies a Quantity's complicated units to their most 'basic' units.

.. code:: python

    >>> energy = Quantity(1, {'J': 1})
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10⁰ J
    >>> print(energy.to_base_units())
    1.000*10⁰ kg-m²/s²

Standardizing Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here are the functions that are currently included in this package.

.. code:: python

    quan.standardized_physics() -> Quantity 
    quan.standardized_chemistry() -> Quantity

Standardizes a Quantity to the standard units in that discipline. Here are the converions made: 

.. code:: python

    PHYSICS_UNITS = ['m', 's', 'kg', 'L', 'K']
    CHEMISTRY_UNITS = ['m', 's', 'g', 'L', 'K', 'atm']

Here is an example:

.. code:: python

    >>> velocity = Quantity(1, {'ly': 1, 'yr': -1})
    >>> print(velocity)
    1.000*10⁰ ly/yr
    >>> print(velocity.standardized_physics())
    2.998*10⁸ m/s

Supported Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Supported operations using the Quantity class involve:

    * Multiplication: With a number or a Quantity
    * Division: With a mumber or a Quantity
    * Addition: With a number (when Quantity is unitless) or a Quantity
    * Exponents: With an integer power

Here is an example of them in action:

.. code:: python

    >>> f1 = Quantity(1, {'N': 1})
    >>> m2 = Quantity(12, {'lb': 1})
    >>> a2 = Quantity(3, {'mi': 1, 'hr': -2})
    >>> print(f"{f1}, {m2}, {a2}")
    1.000*10⁰ N, 1.200*10¹ lb, 3.000*10⁰ mi/hr²
    >>> f2 = m2 * a2            # multiplication
    >>> print(f2)
    3.600*10¹ lb-mi/hr²
    >>> f3 = f1 + f2
    >>> print(f3)               # addition
    1.002*10⁰ N
    >>> m3 = Quantity(6.00, {'st': 1})
    >>> a3 = f3 / m3            # division
    >>> print(a3)
    2.627*10⁻² m/s²

Element
-------

This class represents chemical elements. It uses data from `@Bowserinator <https://github.com/Bowserinator/Periodic-Table-JSON>`_ to represent chemical elements. You can import it using either of the following:

.. code:: python

    from unisci import Element
    from unisci.types import Element

You initialize an element using EITHER its name, symbol, or atomic number.

.. code:: python

    hydrogen = Element(element_name="hydrogen")
    hydrogen = Element(element_symbol='H')
    hydrogen = Element(element_number=1)

Only one of the the three arguments can be entered, otherwise, an error is raised.

Here are some things you can do with this class. Note: :code:`element` represents an arbitrary element.

:code:`element.name`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the name of the element as a string, capitalized. Note: the name for the element :code:`aluminum` returns :code:`alumunium`.

.. code:: python

    >>> al = Element(element_symbol='Al')
    >>> al.name
    'Aluminium'

:code:`element.number`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's atomic number.

.. code:: python

    >>> hg = Element(element_name="mercury")
    >>> hg.number
    80

:code:`element.symbol`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's symbol.

.. code:: python

    >>> iron = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> iron.symbol
    'Fe'

:code:`element.desc`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's description as a String.

.. code:: python

    >>> u = Element(element_number=92)
    >>> print(u.desc)
    Uranium is a chemical element with symbol U and atomic number 92. It is a silvery-white metal in the actinide series of the periodic table. A uranium atom has 92 protons and 92 electrons, of which 6 are valence electrons.

:code:`element.discoverer`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the name of the person who discovered the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> u = Element(element_number=92)
    >>> u.discoverer
    'Martin Heinrich Klaproth'

:code:`element.atomic_mass`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the atomic mass of the element in grams per mole.

.. code:: python

    >>> he = Element(element_name="helium")
    >>> he.atomic_mass
    Quantity(4.0026022, {'g': 1, 'mol': -1})

:code:`element.state`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the state of the element at room temperature.

.. code:: python

    >>> n = Element(element_name="nitrogen")
    >>> n.state
    'Gas'

:code:`element.density`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the density of the element at room temperature as a Quantity in g/L if the element is a gas and in g/mL for Liquids or Solids.

.. code:: python

    >>> tungsten = Element(element_symbol="W")
    >>> tungsten.density
    Quantity(19.25, {'g': 1, 'mL': -1})

:code:`element.boiling_point`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the boiling point of the element in Kelvin, as a Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> fe = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> fe.boiling_point
    Quantity(3134.0, {'K': 1})

:code:`element.melting_point`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the melting point of the element in Kelvin, as a Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> fe = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> fe.melting_point 
    Quantity(1811.0, {'K': 1})

:code:`element.period`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the period of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> k = Element(element_symbol="K")
    >>> k.period
    4

:code:`element.group`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the group of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> k = Element(element_symbol="K")
    >>> k.group
    1

:code:`element.electron_config_str`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's electron configuration as a string.

.. code:: python

    >>> mg = Element(element_symbol="Mg")
    >>> mg.electron_config_str
    '1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2'

:code:`element.electron_config`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a dictionary of electron orbitals and electron counts within those orbitals.

.. code:: python

    >>> mg = Element(element_symbol="Mg")
    >>> mg.electron_config 
    {'1s': 2, '2s': 2, '2p': 6, '3s': 2}

:code:`element.noble_gas_config_str`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a string containing the element's noble gas configuration with the gas.

.. code:: python

    >>> mercury = Element(element_symbol="Hg")
    >>> mercury.noble_gas_config_str
    '[Xe] 4f14 5d10 6s2'

:code:`element.noble_gas_config`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a dictionary, containing the gas, and a nested dictionary of electron orbitals and their counts.

.. code:: python

    >>> mercury = Element(element_symbol="Hg")
    >>> mercury.noble_gas_config
    {'gas': <unisci.types.Element object at 0x1025a3f10>, 'configuration': {'4f': 14, '5d': 10, '6s': 2}}

:code:`element.electron_affinity`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the electron affinity of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen = Element(element_number=8)
    >>> oxygen.electron_affinity
    140.976

:code:`element.electronegativity`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the Pauling electronegativity of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen = Element(element_number=8)
    >>> oxygen.electronegativity
    3.44

:code:`element.get_ionization_energy(level)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the level-th ionization energy of the element as a Quantity in kJ/mol.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen.get_ionization_energy(level=1)
    Quantity(1313.9, {'kJ': 1, 'mol': -1})

Commit message:

v1.5.0: added str and repr for element

docs/documentation.rst, after:

Documentation
=============

Below is documentation for the various features in this module!

.. _Supported Conversions:

Supported Conversions
---------------------

Metric Conversions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below are the supported metric prefixes handled in this package:

.. code:: python

    'y': 1e-24
    'z': 1e-21
    'a': 1e-18
    'f': 1e-15
    'p': 1e-12
    'n': 1e-9
    'µ': 1e-6
    'mc': 1e-6      # for those who cannot use the µ symbol
    'm': 1e-3
    'c': 1e-2
    'd': 1e-1
    'da': 1e1
    'h': 1e2
    'k': 1e3
    'M': 1e6
    'G': 1e9
    'T': 1e12
    'P': 1e15
    'E': 1e18
    'Z': 1e21
    'Y': 1e24

And here are the supported units for converting metric:

.. code:: python

    's', 'm', 'g', 'K', 'mol', 'J', 'W', 'N', 'Pa', 'L'

Conversion Factors
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Below is a list of supported units for conversions for each conversion type. It contains the unit, followed by its conversion factor to the chosen reference unit for the conversion group (conversion factor is simply what you multiply a measurement in that unit by to get the number of reference units).

Length Conversions
++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is meters.

.. code:: python

    'ft': 0.3048    # feet
    'yd': 0.9144    # yards
    'in': 0.0254    # inches
    'mi': 1609      # miles
    'ly': 946e13    # light years
    'au': 1496e8    # astronomical units
    'pc': 31e15     # parsecs
    'm': 1          # meters

Weight / Mass Conversions
+++++++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is grams.

.. code:: python

    'g': 1              # grams
    'lb': 454           # pounds
    'oz': 454 / 16      # ounces
    'st': 6356          # stones
    'amu': 1.661e-24    # atomic mass units

Time Conversions
++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is seconds.

.. code:: python

    's': 1                          # seconds
    'min': 60                       # minutes
    'hr': 3600                      # hours
    'dy': 3600 * 24                 # days
    'wk': 3600 * 24 * 7             # weeks
    'yr': 3600 * 24 * 365.25        # year

Volume Conversions
++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is liters.

.. code:: python

    'L': 1                  # liters
    'c.': 0.2366,           # cups
    'pt.': 0.2366 * 2       # pints
    'qt.': 0.2366 * 4       # quarts
    'gal.': 0.2366 * 16     # gallons
    'fl. oz': 0.2366 / 8    # fluid ounces
    'tbsp': 0.2366 / 16     # tablespoons
    'tsp': 0.2366 / 48      # teaspoons

Temperature Conversions
+++++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is Kelvin. Note: these are absolute temperature conversions (not in reference to the boiling point of water like traditional Celsius and Fahrenheit)

.. code:: python

    'deg. C': 1             # degrees Celsius
    'deg. F': 5 / 9         # degrees Fahrenheit
    'K': 1                  # Kelvin

Pressure Conversions
++++++++++++++++++++

The reference unit used for this is the atm.

.. code:: python

    'atm': 1                # atmospheres
    'torr': 0.0013157       # torr
    'mm Hg': 0.0013157      # millimeters mercury
    'bar': 0.986923         # bars
    'Pa': 0.0000098         # pascals
    'psi': 0.068046         # pounds per cubed inch

Quantity
--------

This is the class that will manage most of your conversions. To import this, you can run either of the following:

.. code:: python

    from unisci import Quantity
    from unisci.types import Quantity

You can create a Quantity using a constructor in the following format: 

.. code:: 

    Quantity(<value>, <dict>)

Where <value> is the numerical value of the Quantity and <dict> is a dictionary of units and their powers. For example, here is the initialization of a Quantity holding the value :code:`1.0 m/s²`.

.. code:: python

    >>> length = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(length)
    1.000*10⁰ m/s²

Below are methods associated with this class. :code:`quan` represents an arbitrary Quantity object.

:code:`Quantity.set_precision()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_precision(number: int) -> None

Sets the precision (number of decimal places) of printing output. The default value is 3, which is why the above example prints :code:`1.000` rather than :code:`1.0`. The below example sets the precision to 2 decimal places.

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_precision(number=2)

:code:`Quantity.set_auto_format()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    Quantity.set_auto_format(do: bool) -> None

Determines if the auto-conversions should be done. For example, when multiplying Quantity's with units :code:`m` and :code:`in`, if :code:`auto_format` is enabled, the product will be in the units of the first number. It also enables auto-condensation of complicated units, which will be elaborated upon further regarding the :code:`x.simplified()` method.

.. code:: python

    >>> length_m = Quantity(1, {'m': 1})
    >>> length_in = Quantity(40, {'in': 1})
    >>> print(length_m * length_in)
    1.016*10⁰ m²
    >>> Quantity.set_auto_format(False)
    >>> print(length_m * length_in)
    4.000*10¹ m-in

:code:`quan.value`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python
    
    quan.value -> float

Returns the numerical value of the Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> x = Quantity(12, {'m': 1})
    >>> print(x.value)
    12.0

:code:`quan.units`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.units -> dict[str, int]

Returns a dictionary of units and powers of the Quantity's overall composition. Internally, the dictionary is stored as :code:`quan.unit_type`, but calling :code:`quan.units` is better because it returns a copy of the dictionary.

.. code:: python

    >>> x = Quantity(12, {'m': 1})
    >>> print(x.units)
    {'m': 1}

:code:`quan.converted()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.converted(target_units: list[str]) -> Quantity

Returns a Quantity converted to all the units it can in the provided list of target units. 

.. code:: python

    >>> velocity = Quantity(1, {'in': 1, 'min': -1})
    >>> print(velocity)
    1.000*10⁰ in/min
    >>> velocity = velocity.converted(['cm', 's'])
    >>> print(velocity)
    4.233*10⁻² cm/s

Supported units for conversion can be found in the :ref:`Supported Conversions` section.

:code:`quan.converted_metric()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.converted_metric(target: str, original: str) -> Quantity

Returns a new Quantity with metric conversions being done. This is useful for complex units that aren't supported in normal conversions, such as Newtons or Joules.

.. code:: python

    >>> energy = Quantity(1000, {'J': 1})
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10³ J
    >>> energy = energy.converted_metric(original='J', target='kJ')
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10⁰ kJ

Specific Conversions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following methods are available for specific conversions, although generally using :code:`quan.converted()` is better:

    * :code:`quan.converted_length()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_mass()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_time()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_volume()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_temperature()`
    * :code:`quan.converted_pressure()`

All of the following follow the same format:

.. code:: python

    quan.converted_function(target: str, original: str) -> Quantity

They take in a target unit and an optional original unit. If no original unit is entered, all compatible conversions will be done to the target unit. These are useful for when you want to convert only one kind of unit to the other, as shown here:

.. code:: python

    >>> weird_unit = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 'ft': -1})
    >>> print(weird_unit)
    1.000*10⁰ m/ft
    >>> weird_unit = weird_unit.converted_length(original='ft', target='in')
    >>> print(weird_unit)
    8.333*10⁻² m/in

:code:`quan.simplified()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.simplified() -> Quantity

Returns a Quantity with units automatically condensed into complex units. If `Quantity.auto_format` is set to True, this will happen automatically upon conversions or multiplications with other units.

.. code:: python

    >>> Quantity.set_auto_format(False)
    >>> force = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 'kg': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(force)
    1.000*10⁰ m-kg/s²
    >>> print(force.simplified())
    1.000*10⁰ N

:code:`quan.force_simplified()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.force_simplified(target: str, exp: int = 1) -> Quantity

Forcibly converts a unit to the given target. Does this by multiplying by the inverse of the 'base units'.

.. code:: python

    >>> acceleration = Quantity(1, {'m': 1, 's': -2})
    >>> print(acceleration)
    1.000*10⁰ m/s²
    >>> print(acceleration.force_simplified(target='N', exp=1))
    1.000*10⁰ N/kg

:code:`quan.to_base_units()`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. code:: python

    quan.to_base_units() -> Quantity

Simplifies a Quantity's complicated units to their most 'basic' units.

.. code:: python

    >>> energy = Quantity(1, {'J': 1})
    >>> print(energy)
    1.000*10⁰ J
    >>> print(energy.to_base_units())
    1.000*10⁰ kg-m²/s²

Standardizing Functions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Here are the functions that are currently included in this package.

.. code:: python

    quan.standardized_physics() -> Quantity 
    quan.standardized_chemistry() -> Quantity

Standardizes a Quantity to the standard units in that discipline. Here are the converions made: 

.. code:: python

    PHYSICS_UNITS = ['m', 's', 'kg', 'L', 'K']
    CHEMISTRY_UNITS = ['m', 's', 'g', 'L', 'K', 'atm']

Here is an example:

.. code:: python

    >>> velocity = Quantity(1, {'ly': 1, 'yr': -1})
    >>> print(velocity)
    1.000*10⁰ ly/yr
    >>> print(velocity.standardized_physics())
    2.998*10⁸ m/s

Supported Operations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Supported operations using the Quantity class involve:

    * Multiplication: With a number or a Quantity
    * Division: With a mumber or a Quantity
    * Addition: With a number (when Quantity is unitless) or a Quantity
    * Exponents: With an integer power

Here is an example of them in action:

.. code:: python

    >>> f1 = Quantity(1, {'N': 1})
    >>> m2 = Quantity(12, {'lb': 1})
    >>> a2 = Quantity(3, {'mi': 1, 'hr': -2})
    >>> print(f"{f1}, {m2}, {a2}")
    1.000*10⁰ N, 1.200*10¹ lb, 3.000*10⁰ mi/hr²
    >>> f2 = m2 * a2            # multiplication
    >>> print(f2)
    3.600*10¹ lb-mi/hr²
    >>> f3 = f1 + f2
    >>> print(f3)               # addition
    1.002*10⁰ N
    >>> m3 = Quantity(6.00, {'st': 1})
    >>> a3 = f3 / m3            # division
    >>> print(a3)
    2.627*10⁻² m/s²

Element
-------

This class represents chemical elements. It uses data from `@Bowserinator <https://github.com/Bowserinator/Periodic-Table-JSON>`_ to represent chemical elements. You can import it using either of the following:

.. code:: python

    from unisci import Element
    from unisci.types import Element

You initialize an element using EITHER its name, symbol, or atomic number.

.. code:: python

    hydrogen = Element(element_name="hydrogen")
    hydrogen = Element(element_symbol='H')
    hydrogen = Element(element_number=1)

Only one of the the three arguments can be entered, otherwise, an error is raised.

Here are some things you can do with this class. Note: :code:`element` represents an arbitrary element.

:code:`element.name`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the name of the element as a string, capitalized. Note: the name for the element :code:`aluminum` returns :code:`alumunium`.

.. code:: python

    >>> al = Element(element_symbol='Al')
    >>> al.name
    'Aluminium'

:code:`element.number`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's atomic number.

.. code:: python

    >>> hg = Element(element_name="mercury")
    >>> hg.number
    80

:code:`element.symbol`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's symbol. This is also called with the element's :code:`__str__` method.

.. code:: python

    >>> iron = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> iron.symbol
    'Fe'
    >>> print(iron)
    Fe

:code:`element.desc`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's description as a String.

.. code:: python

    >>> u = Element(element_number=92)
    >>> print(u.desc)
    Uranium is a chemical element with symbol U and atomic number 92. It is a silvery-white metal in the actinide series of the periodic table. A uranium atom has 92 protons and 92 electrons, of which 6 are valence electrons.

:code:`element.discoverer`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the name of the person who discovered the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> u = Element(element_number=92)
    >>> u.discoverer
    'Martin Heinrich Klaproth'

:code:`element.atomic_mass`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the atomic mass of the element in grams per mole.

.. code:: python

    >>> he = Element(element_name="helium")
    >>> he.atomic_mass
    Quantity(4.0026022, {'g': 1, 'mol': -1})

:code:`element.state`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the state of the element at room temperature.

.. code:: python

    >>> n = Element(element_name="nitrogen")
    >>> n.state
    'Gas'

:code:`element.density`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the density of the element at room temperature as a Quantity in g/L if the element is a gas and in g/mL for Liquids or Solids.

.. code:: python

    >>> tungsten = Element(element_symbol="W")
    >>> tungsten.density
    Quantity(19.25, {'g': 1, 'mL': -1})

:code:`element.boiling_point`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the boiling point of the element in Kelvin, as a Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> fe = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> fe.boiling_point
    Quantity(3134.0, {'K': 1})

:code:`element.melting_point`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the melting point of the element in Kelvin, as a Quantity.

.. code:: python

    >>> fe = Element(element_name="iron")
    >>> fe.melting_point 
    Quantity(1811.0, {'K': 1})

:code:`element.period`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the period of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> k = Element(element_symbol="K")
    >>> k.period
    4

:code:`element.group`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the group of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> k = Element(element_symbol="K")
    >>> k.group
    1

:code:`element.electron_config_str`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the element's electron configuration as a string.

.. code:: python

    >>> mg = Element(element_symbol="Mg")
    >>> mg.electron_config_str
    '1s2 2s2 2p6 3s2'

:code:`element.electron_config`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a dictionary of electron orbitals and electron counts within those orbitals.

.. code:: python

    >>> mg = Element(element_symbol="Mg")
    >>> mg.electron_config 
    {'1s': 2, '2s': 2, '2p': 6, '3s': 2}

:code:`element.noble_gas_config_str`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a string containing the element's noble gas configuration with the gas.

.. code:: python

    >>> mercury = Element(element_symbol="Hg")
    >>> mercury.noble_gas_config_str
    '[Xe] 4f14 5d10 6s2'

:code:`element.noble_gas_config`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns a dictionary, containing the gas, and a nested dictionary of electron orbitals and their counts.

.. code:: python

    >>> mercury = Element(element_symbol="Hg")
    >>> mercury.noble_gas_config
    {'gas': Element(element_symbol='Xe'), 'configuration': {'4f': 14, '5d': 10, '6s': 2}}

:code:`element.electron_affinity`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the electron affinity of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen = Element(element_number=8)
    >>> oxygen.electron_affinity
    140.976

:code:`element.electronegativity`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the Pauling electronegativity of the element.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen = Element(element_number=8)
    >>> oxygen.electronegativity
    3.44

:code:`element.get_ionization_energy(level)`
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Returns the level-th ionization energy of the element as a Quantity in kJ/mol.

.. code:: python

    >>> oxygen.get_ionization_energy(level=1)
    Quantity(1313.9, {'kJ': 1, 'mol': -1})
